---
title: 'SteamOS is HARD to tame'
tags: System
date: 2021-07-22 13:29:39
---


Just bought a steamdeck for pure curiosity. The device surprises my in every aspect. It's not as heavy as expected, pretty durable with tweakable TDP, with a seemingly versatile arch linux base system. However, the system is READONLY, to a degree. From as far as I've suffered, the `/usr` path is readonly, which really forbids almost all pacman packages from being installed. Which is also why I'm writing in English. I cannot install `fcitx`, thus no IME!!!

There indeed, is a dirty way to solve this. Which is:
```
sudo steamos-readonly disable
```
The command make steamos a fully writable, normal arch linux distribution. The only bad thing is, after next steamos update, everything you wrote would be reset. I would like some elegant solution to this.

The first thing that comes to me is to check what the heck is readonly at all. Let's see what `mount` says.

```
> mount
/dev/nvme0n1p4 on / type btrfs (rw,relatime,ssd,space_cache=v2,subvolid=5,subvol=/)
/dev/nvme0n1p6 on /var type ext4 (rw,relatime)
overlay on /etc type overlay (rw,relatime,lowerdir=/sysroot/etc,upperdir=/sysroot/var/lib/overlays/etc/upper,workdir=/sysroot/var/lib/overlays/etc/work)
/dev/nvme0n1p8 on /home type ext4 (rw,relatime,x-systemd.growfs)
/dev/nvme0n1p8 on /opt type ext4 (rw,relatime)
/dev/nvme0n1p8 on /root type ext4 (rw,relatime)
/dev/nvme0n1p8 on /srv type ext4 (rw,relatime)
tmpfs on /tmp type tmpfs (rw,nosuid,nodev,nr_inodes=1048576,inode64)
/dev/nvme0n1p8 on /var/cache/pacman type ext4 (rw,relatime)
/dev/nvme0n1p8 on /var/lib/docker type ext4 (rw,relatime)
/dev/nvme0n1p8 on /var/lib/flatpak type ext4 (rw,relatime)
/dev/nvme0n1p8 on /var/lib/systemd/coredump type ext4 (rw,relatime)
/dev/nvme0n1p8 on /var/log type ext4 (rw,relatime)
/dev/nvme0n1p8 on /var/tmp type ext4 (rw,relatime)
/dev/mmcblk0p1 on /run/media/mmcblk0p1 type ext4 (rw,noatime)
```

Ok, the `/etc` is overlayed so it is writable, make sense. But why `/` is rw?

Now according to this https://www.svenknebel.de/posts/2022/5/2/, `/usr/bin/steamos-readonly` is a shell script (That's astonishing). And the readonly is a btrfs tweak, rather than a mount one.

That does not help. I suppose there leaves us to choose among a few other ways.

1. Turn to `homebrew`. I saw this online and I'm not so sure why homebrew does not write to `/usr`. But hey `homebrew` is nothing related to elegant.
2. Install everything in container. But how am I supposed to install a container runtime without writing to `/usr`?
3. Use a script to automate the installations, ugly.

I've tested designating `pacman` to install packages in a separate root dir, which proves very awkward. The applications are not very friendly and without a `chroot` they refuse to work properly. And when they do write to writable paths (`/etc` for configs and services), it does not work as expected.

I guess I'll try

4. Use a overlay fs to mimic a writable root.

And here comes https://github.com/ValShaped/rwfus. Which seems to work. Let's see now if I can use `Rime`.

God damn it no! When I last installed `Rime` `/usr` was readonly, and pacman supposed the installation is successful! `fcitx-diagnose` gives lots of unfounded dependencies, now I have to reinstall them all, one by one.

And after everything done `fcitx5` still does not seem to work properly. The `pinyin` IME just does not work with no prompts and `Rime` said an error occured and I should check `/tmp/rime.fcitx.ERROR`, while there is no such file! There is one post discussing such problem https://forum.suse.org.cn/t/topic/14534, but it seems to be a packing bug rather than a program one. At this point I have no idea how to fix that.

好吧，尝试了一下discover里面的fcitx和rime，完全能用！居然最后靠谱的是应用商店。将 `/home/deck/.local/share/fcitx5/rime/build/luna_pinyin.schema.yaml` 中的设置改为默认简体后就没有什么问题了。

插曲：在编译`yay`时，不知是否是之前安装`gcc` `/usr` 的写入权限有问题，c标准头文件全都没了。重新安装`gcc`也不解决问题。我从之前那个chroot版pacman里面拷了一份出来，意外地用起来毫无问题。

总结一下，拿到 steamos 首先先解决只读文件系统的问题，不要直接用 `pacman` 装东西，不然就会因为 `/etc` 能写而装进去了，但因为 `/usr` 不能写而没完全装进去。
